docs: document api changes to add cumulative to delta support in metr… (#2301)
kyma-project/telemetry-manager: docs/contributor/arch/022-dynatrace-cummulative-to-delta-support.md

Option 2: Add `aggregationTemporality` under `spec.output.otlp`

This locates the setting within the backend-specific output configuration, directly associating it with the Dynatrace OTLP exporter.

```yaml
apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
kind: MetricPipeline
metadata:
  name: sample
spec:
  input:
    runtime:
      enabled: true
    prometheus:
      enabled: true
    istio:
      enabled: true
  transform:
  - conditions:
    - ...
    - ...
    statements:
    - ...
    - ...
  filter: {}
  output:
    otlp:
      aggregationTemporality: cumulative # or delta or none (default)
      endpoint:
        value: http://foo.bar:4317
```

- **Pros**
  - Keeps the setting close to where the metrics are sent. 
  - Feels natural for users who expect backend-specific control in the output section.

- **Cons**
  - Adds ambiguity to the purpose of the output section, which traditionally doesn’t handle transformations. 
  - Users may not expect transformation logic to appear here. 
  - Similar to `Option 1`, it introduces complexity and documentation requirements. 
  - May not align well with the separation of concerns in the telemetry pipeline design.

>   - The `output.otlp` API designed to share across all signal types, which may lead to confusion if users expect it to apply only to metrics.

Reviewer: updated

>   - The `output.otlp` API designed to share across all signal types, which may lead to confusion if users expect it to apply only to metrics.

Reviewer 2: partly. https://github.com/kyma-project/telemetry-manager/pull/2301#discussion_r2235375330

## Context

> The telemetry module supports exporting metrics to Dynatrace. However, Dynatrace has [limited support](https://docs.dynatrace.com/docs/ingest-from/opentelemetry/getting-started/metrics/limitations#temporality-temporality) for cumulative metrics and primarily accepts delta metrics. To ensure compatibility, the telemetry metric pipeline should allow converting cumulative metrics to delta format prior to export.

Reviewer 2: Did you test this link??
Why would the URL change just because we chose a different name for our parameter?

## Context

> The telemetry module supports exporting metrics to Dynatrace. However, Dynatrace has [limited support](https://docs.dynatrace.com/docs/ingest-from/opentelemetry/getting-started/metrics/limitations#aggregation-temporality) for cumulative metrics and primarily accepts delta metrics. To ensure compatibility, the telemetry metric pipeline should allow converting cumulative metrics to delta format prior to export.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Telemetry module supports exporting metrics to Dynatrace. However, Dynatrace has [limited support](https://docs.dynatrace.com/docs/ingest-from/opentelemetry/getting-started/metrics/limitations#aggregation-temporality) for cumulative metrics and primarily accepts delta metrics. To ensure compatibility, the telemetry metric pipeline should allow converting cumulative metrics to delta format prior to export.
```

  - Users may not expect transformation logic to appear here. 
  - Similar to `Option 1`, it introduces complexity and documentation requirements. 
  - May not align well with the separation of concerns in the telemetry pipeline design.

>   - The `output.otlp` API is designed to share across all signal types `logs`, `traces`, and `metrics`, which may lead to confusion if users expect it to apply only to metrics.

Reviewer 2: The API is designed to share *what* across all signal types? T
his sentence seems incomplete.

Reviewer 2: Oh! Well if it's passive, then rephrase the verb instead of adding what it shares.

> The `output.otlp` API is designed to be shared across...

## Conclusion

Both API placement options provide valid mechanisms for configuring aggregation temporality conversion, each with trade-offs in usability, clarity, and architectural alignment.

> The API name `temporality` selected, instead of more verbose alternatives like `aggregationTemporality` or `metricTemporality` because `temporality` is a fundamental concept in how metrics are collected, stored, and reported. This highlights that temporality itself—not just a sub-aspect like aggregation or metric-specific handling—is central to the design of metrics systems.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We choose the API name `temporality (instead of more verbose alternatives like `aggregationTemporality` or `metricTemporality`) because `temporality` is a fundamental concept in how metrics are collected, stored, and reported. This highlights that temporality itself — not just a sub-aspect like aggregation or metric-specific handling— is central to the design of metrics systems.
```

> Using the concise name `temporality` reflects that this is a core abstraction, not just an implementation detail or a modifier of another concept. It keeps the API clean and focused while preserving semantic clarity. Any user familiar with metrics will understand `temporality` in context—whereas adding prefixes like `aggregation`, `metric`, `delta`, or `cumulative` would be redundant and unnecessarily verbose.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the concise name `temporality` reflects that this is a core abstraction, not just an implementation detail or a modifier of another concept. It keeps the API clean and focused while preserving semantic clarity. Any user familiar with metrics will understand `temporality` in context — whereas adding prefixes like `aggregation`, `metric`, `delta`, or `cumulative` would be redundant and unnecessarily verbose.
```
